A Lender of Last Resort? Russian Crisis Shows the Need
It seems that postcommunist Russia poses a greater threat to global capitalism than the Soviet Union ever did. The Russian debt default in mid-August has generated financial shock waves that could drive next year's growth rate of the world economy to the lowest level in the postwar era. There are worrying signs that the U.S. will experience a credit crunch in the banking sector that could offset the benefits of lower interest rates. And while the European economy still enjoys moderate growth momentum, it will be highly vulnerable to an export slump if the rest of the world continues to slow.</br></br>The magnitude of the correction after the Russian default illustrates how profoundly global financial markets have changed as new technology has driven down the cost of trading, hedge funds have gained access to leverage from bankers, and investors have developed an increasing appetite for risk following the long Wall Street boom. In turn, these changes have exposed how vulnerable the global financial system is, and underscored the need for an international lender of last resort.</br></br>One vulnerability is the remarkable interdependence that has developed among markets because of the growth of global capital flows and the increasing role of highly leveraged investors in allocating capital. In the late 1980s, capital flows to developing countries were less than $50 billion. The Cold War's end and the growth of financial markets in developing countries drove this figure up to more than $300 billion in 1996.</br></br>There has also been a dramatic expansion in the size of security markets. In the U.S., the ratio of stock-market capitalization to gross domestic product has nearly tripled during the 1990s while the mutual-fund industry now has greater assets than the banking system. The spectacular performance of the U.S. equity market stimulated an appetite for risk among high-income investors that encouraged a proliferation of new hedge funds. According to survey data, the U.S. now has more than 1,200 hedge funds with $200 billion to $300 billion in assets. During the 1990s these funds have become leading players in emerging markets.</br></br>When Russia defaulted, it did not merely force some hedge funds to liquidate securities in other emerging markets. Instead, it produced such losses that many bankers felt compelled to curtail both their security market and their lending exposure in emerging markets. It also prompted some hedge funds to repay the low-cost yen loans they had taken out to finance security purchases and thus encouraged a large rally in the yen. Before August, few investors would have expected a Russian default to shatter Latin America's access to credit or produce a surge in the value of the yen, but such are the consequences of today's new global financial integration.
